---
title: 'Syncing Linux Screenshots using Bluetooth'
date: '2023-12-14 20:06:10+00:00'
categories: [linux]
tags: [experience, howto]
---
I like to take notes on my tablet while working at the computer, and I like to insert screenshots into the notes. 
I went looking for a way to seemlessly transfer screenshots (or other files) between Linux and Android using Bluetooth[^1]. 

The conventional method is as follows:
- take a screenshot using screenshot software (e.g. [Flameshot](https://flameshot.org/)) - start the screenshot, select an area of the screen, save the image
- open a bluetooth manager or file manager, find the screenshot file, and transfer it to the tablet 
- on the tablet, accept the file
- wait for it to transfer, insert it into the image

My goal was to make this process as seamless as possible - obviously some manual steps (such as selecting the screenshot area and inserting the image) can't be avoided. Mainly, I would like to avoid having to open a separate program just to start the file transfer.

As a result I wrote this bash script (saved in `$HOME/bluesync/watcher.sh`):

```shell
#!/bin/sh

while true; do
        fname=$(inotifywait -e create --format '%f' "$HOME"/bluesync/files) || exit
        echo sending "$HOME"/bluesync/files/"$fname"
        bluetooth-sendto --device <tablet bluetooth address> "$HOME"/bluesync/files/"$fname" >&2;
done
```

This script waits for a new file to be created in the $HOME/bluesync/files directory, and then uses the `bluetooth-sendto` utility to send it to the device.

I added `"$HOME/bluesync/watcher.sh" &` to the end of `$HOME/.profile` so that this script runs when I login[^2].

Obviously this program does not only send screenshots to the tablet, it will send anything placed into the bluesync folder. This is still far from a fully featured sync program such as Syncthing, but even a simple one-way file transfer shortcut like this can be very useful.

[^1]: I need to use bluetooth because of my particular network setup, which makes using solutions such as Snapdrop and Syncthing difficult or impossible. It might be possible to sync via a cloud provider on a regular Android device with access to the Google app store, but most cloud providers are not supported on Huawei, Linux, or both.

[^2]: Depending on your setup and use case it might need to be invoked somewhere else.
