---
title: '.tel me - an exploration of a unique top level domain'
date: '2024-01-15 12:44:36+00:00'
categories: [research]
tags: [dns]
---

I am fascinated by fringe alternative uses of the DNS, and so I came across the .tel Top Level Domain (TLD). These days, it is primarily a TLD like any other, but its original purpose was quite different. As shown in a very cheesy [ad](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pfdoPtRo0m4), it was supposed to be a digital business card. Instead of tediously dictating a phone number, one would simply share a "telname", `jane-smith.tel` for example, and resolving that domain name would retrieve the person's contact information. And I mean resolving literally - because everything is stored directly in the DNS.

This appears to have raised some publicity in the late 2000s, but it eventually faded away, possibly because registering a .tel domain costs money, but dictating a phone number is free. In 2016, the TLD started to function as a regular TLD alongside the "business card" Telhosting service[^1]. But - somewhat surprisingly - the business card part remains available in 2024. All this led me to wonder: how does this work?
## DNS internals
While the domain now also functions as a regular TLD, the Telhosting service stores the information in the DNS *directly*, mainly in the form of TXT and NAPTR records. I have come across some existing Telpages belonging to real people and businesses, but in order to protect their contact information, I will only refer to the official example page http://telpage.tel here. 
The page displays all kinds of information: phone numbers, email addresses, socials, web site links, a map, images, and video links. There is also a facility to "share this .tel", using links that hardcode "Please check out http://telpage.tel" into the message body on Facebook, Twitter and email.
The design looks dated, but the concept is useful - similar to a [linktr.ee](https://linktr.ee/) page today.

Lets query the DNS to look inside.
My initial thought was that the information must be stored in TXT records, a record type that allows arbitrary text (up to a certain length) to be stored in the DNS.
```
el@precision:~$ dig TXT telpage.tel

; <<>> DiG 9.18.20 <<>> TXT telpage.tel
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 26487
;; flags: qr rd ra; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 14, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 1

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 65494
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;telpage.tel.			IN	TXT

;; ANSWER SECTION:
telpage.tel.		60	IN	TXT	".tlb" "1" "100" "103" "Facebook"
telpage.tel.		60	IN	TXT	".tlb" "1" "100" "102" ""
telpage.tel.		60	IN	TXT	".tlb" "1" "100" "101" ""
telpage.tel.		60	IN	TXT	".tlb" "1" "100" "100" "My main land line number"
telpage.tel.		60	IN	TXT	".tkw" "1" "Demo Site" "This site is for demonstration purposes only. All data used  is fictitious"
telpage.tel.		60	IN	TXT	"$9daf82caba302aed84b03$Welcome to my new Telpage Digital Profile. All information shown is dummy data used for demonstration purposes only "
telpage.tel.		60	IN	TXT	".tsm" "15" "pddx" "1" "color1" "" "color2" "" "color3" "" "color4" "#000000" "css" "101-4-1" "pss" "" "hml" "" "htl" "1" "gan" "" "log" "" "bkg" "https://d3799k1g9t5tc9.cloudfront.net/img/abspurple.jpg" "bip" "1" "hdrbkg" "https://d3799k1g9t5tc9.cloudfront.net/img/rrq5pqq3jpcp7tild9kqcl0tpv6ap5gg.png" "hdrurl" ""
telpage.tel.		60	IN	TXT	".tsm" "15" "dds" "My Telpage !!"
telpage.tel.		60	IN	TXT	".tlb" "1" "100" "109" "Example Go To Link"
telpage.tel.		60	IN	TXT	".tlb" "1" "100" "108" "My main website"
telpage.tel.		60	IN	TXT	".tlb" "1" "100" "107" ""
telpage.tel.		60	IN	TXT	".tlb" "1" "100" "106" "Google Plus"
telpage.tel.		60	IN	TXT	".tlb" "1" "100" "105" "LinkedIn"
telpage.tel.		60	IN	TXT	".tlb" "1" "100" "104" "Twitter"

;; Query time: 1034 msec
;; SERVER: 127.0.0.53#53(127.0.0.53) (UDP)
;; WHEN: Sun Jan 14 15:15:05 GMT 2024
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 969
```
(for those not familiar with dig output, each line in the answer section prefaced with `telpage.tel.` corresponds to one TXT record, and the text record values are what follows `TXT`).

This is interesting: some of the information is stored here, such as the names of the socials (Facebook, Google Plus, LinkedIn etc) and the textual data ("My Telpage !!", "This site is for demonstration purposes only\[...\]"). It also contains what appears to be style information and links to images. However the social media and website links and the phone numbers are missing.
As a [helpful blog post](https://shkspr.mobi/blog/2017/02/whats-the-future-for-the-tel-domain-name/) pointed out, these can be found in a NAPTR record:
```
el@precision:~$ dig NAPTR telpage.tel

; <<>> DiG 9.18.20 <<>> NAPTR telpage.tel
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 39497
;; flags: qr rd ra; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 11, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 1

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 65494
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;telpage.tel.			IN	NAPTR

;; ANSWER SECTION:
telpage.tel.		60	IN	NAPTR	100 101 "u" "E2U+voice:tel+x-mobile" "!^.*$!tel:+1303234567!" .
telpage.tel.		60	IN	NAPTR	100 100 "u" "E2U+voice:tel" "!^.*$!tel:+1303123456!" .
telpage.tel.		60	IN	NAPTR	100 65535 "u" "E2U+web:https" "!^.*$!https://youtu.be/pfdoPtRo0m4!" .
telpage.tel.		60	IN	NAPTR	100 109 "" "" "" telnic.tel.
telpage.tel.		60	IN	NAPTR	100 108 "u" "E2U+web:http" "!^.*$!http://www.mymainwebiste.com!" .
telpage.tel.		60	IN	NAPTR	100 107 "u" "E2U+x-voice:skype" "!^.*$!skype:mytelpage!" .
telpage.tel.		60	IN	NAPTR	100 106 "u" "E2U+web:http" "!^.*$!http://plus.google.com/telpage!" .
telpage.tel.		60	IN	NAPTR	100 105 "u" "E2U+web:http" "!^.*$!http://www.linkedin.com/telpage!" .
telpage.tel.		60	IN	NAPTR	100 104 "u" "E2U+web:http" "!^.*$!http://twitter.com/telpage!" .
telpage.tel.		60	IN	NAPTR	100 103 "u" "E2U+web:http" "!^.*$!http://www.facebook.com/telpage!" .
telpage.tel.		60	IN	NAPTR	100 102 "u" "E2U+email:mailto" "!^.*$!mailto:myemail@telpage.tel!" .

;; Query time: 66 msec
;; SERVER: 127.0.0.53#53(127.0.0.53) (UDP)
;; WHEN: Sun Jan 14 15:21:58 GMT 2024
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 737
```
The purpose of NAPTR records is to encode URIs into DNS records.
Using RFC 2918 and 3403, the NAPTR records here can be understood as follows:

`telpage.tel.		60	IN	NAPTR	100 101 "u" "E2U+voice:tel+x-mobile" "!^.*$!tel:+1303234567!" .` is read as

- `telpage.tel.` **Domain**
- `60`	**TTL** (standard DNS field)
- `IN`	**Class** (standard DNS field)
- `NAPTR` **Type** (i.e. this is a NAPTR record)
- `100` **Order**: Order in which the NAPTR records should be processed (low before high). Note that this is the same for all records here.
- `100` **Preference**: Order in which NAPTR records with equal order should be processed (e.g. for load balancing). Note that the preference differs between records here, this record has the lowest preference value.
- `"u"` **Flag**: U means the Regexp field (the second-to-last field in the record) encodes an URI.
- `"E2U+voice:tel"` **Service**: Protocol/service that this record is for. In this case, [a voice telephony number](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4415.html). 
- `"!^.*$!tel:+1303123456!" .` :**Regexp and replacement**: Encodes the URI using regular expressions.

The numbers in the TXT records correspond to the Order and Preference field of the corresponding NAPTR record. For example, the entry for Google Plus has order 100 and preference 106, and these two numbers are also found in the Google Plus TXT record. I assume that these are used to link the two records together. Some of the TXT records (e.g. Skype, mobile) don't actually name the service, presumably because the service name is encoded in the NAPTR record anyway.

I assume that the data is split across record types this way because NAPTR records provide a standardised way of encoding phone numbers, email addresses and URLs into DNS records. In an article in [The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2008/dec/03/internet-domain-name-tel) from 2008, Telnic states that different applications are supposed to automatically retrieve the appropriate contact information from the domain (e.g. the phone number for a phone client, the email address for an email client). The use of NAPTR records facilitates that. A different technology from the time, ENUM domains, uses NAPTR records in a similar way.
### ENUM
ENUM domains (RFC 6116) map phone numbers to NAPTR records with URIs for email addresses, phone numbers or other contact information.
For example the ENUM information for DENIC looks like this:
```
el@precision:~$ dig NAPTR 0.5.3.2.7.2.9.6.9.4.e164.arpa.

; <<>> DiG 9.18.20 <<>> NAPTR 0.5.3.2.7.2.9.6.9.4.e164.arpa.
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 48851
;; flags: qr rd ra; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 3, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 1

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 65494
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;0.5.3.2.7.2.9.6.9.4.e164.arpa.	IN	NAPTR

;; ANSWER SECTION:
0.5.3.2.7.2.9.6.9.4.e164.arpa. 600 IN	NAPTR	100 20 "u" "E2U+web:http" "!^.*$!http://www.denic.de!" .
0.5.3.2.7.2.9.6.9.4.e164.arpa. 600 IN	NAPTR	100 10 "u" "E2U+voice:tel" "!^.*$!tel:4969272350!" .
0.5.3.2.7.2.9.6.9.4.e164.arpa. 600 IN	NAPTR	100 30 "u" "E2U+email:mailto" "!^.*$!mailto:info@denic.de!" .

;; Query time: 77 msec
;; SERVER: 127.0.0.53#53(127.0.0.53) (UDP)
;; WHEN: Sun Jan 14 16:06:47 GMT 2024
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 236
```
This is similar to the .tel NAPTR records. It is possible that the .tel domain was envisioned to work similarly to ENUM, while also providing a user facing web service.
### LOC Record
Attentive readers might have noticed that one important piece of information found on http://telpage.tel/ isn't in the TXT record or the NAPTR record -  the map widget[^2]. The coordinates for this are encoded in my favourite type of obscure DNS record, a LOC record:
```
el@precision:~$ dig LOC telpage.tel

; <<>> DiG 9.18.20 <<>> LOC telpage.tel
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 7474
;; flags: qr rd ra; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 1, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 1

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 65494
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;telpage.tel.			IN	LOC

;; ANSWER SECTION:
telpage.tel.		60	IN	LOC	40 42 46.021 N 74 0 21.389 W 0.00m 10m 2m 2m

;; Query time: 392 msec
;; SERVER: 127.0.0.53#53(127.0.0.53) (UDP)
;; WHEN: Sun Jan 14 17:46:35 GMT 2024
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 68
```
## The web service
Initially, owners of a .tel domain were not able to modify the NS and A records of their domain. As a result, the tel registry controlled which IP address the .tel domains resolved to. All domains that I found which still use the Telhosting service resolve to the same address - `52.50.143.27`. Entering the IP into the browser directly leads to an error page[^3], since the server needs to know the domain name in order to query the DNS. As confirmed by a packet capture, all these DNS queries are performed by the Telhosting server. The server likely uses the HTTP host field, which contains the domain name, to determine which DNS queries to send. 

All HTTP requests need to contain the host field, because one IP address can be home to many virtual hosts. For example, the IP address of this website (using Github pages) is used for other Github pages as well.  The host field tells the server which website to send.

This means that the user facing part of the .tel web service is not all that different from any other hosting service. Since the webhosting server makes DNS queries to other .tel infrastructure (the .tel DNS servers), the fact that this runs on the DNS becomes a local implementation detail. Most importantly, web users likely won't benefit if someone's .tel information is cached in the DNS. However this benefit remains when not using the web service, and this might have been the main intended use-case of .tel.
## Conclusion
In writing this post I was very tempted to purchase a .tel name and see for myself how data is entered into the system. However, they cost around £20 to register, and I'm not entirely convinced that it is still possible to host new .tel pages - the site to create a Telhosting account is difficult to find on the registry's website, and it only lists two support emails, alongside a link to a portal for existing customers. The fact that the Telhosting pages do not use HTTPS also makes me wonder whether this part of the business is still actively maintained. It is possible that .tel is fully transitioning to being a TLD like any other.

The service is easy to criticise - one could argue that this is misusing the DNS for data storage. It is also, in hindsight, easy to see issues - most people don't want to pay for a domain every year just to have a digital business card. And storing people's contact information in plain view[^4] on a public database just opens the door to all kinds of spam and other malicious activity.

Still, I find the .tel TLD interesting because - as far as I know - there is no commercially available TLD which was not primarily created to map names to IP addresses. .tel is a really clever use of an existing system, and an innovative solution to a real issue. It's fun to wonder what could have been if .tel had caught on in a big way.
## Additional Section
- [.tel related news items on domainnamewire.com](https://domainnamewire.com/tag/telnic/)
- Good explanations of ENUM domains: [https://www.denic.de/en/domains/enum-domains/technical-details-about-enum](https://www.denic.de/en/domains/enum-domains/technical-details-about-enum),  [https://circleid.com/posts/enum_mapping_e164_into_dns](https://circleid.com/posts/enum_mapping_e164_into_dns)
- [2010 podcast interview with the CTO of Telnic, Henri Asseily](https://web.archive.org/web/20130729202449id_/http://itc.conversationsnetwork.org/shows/detail4424.html) very interesting conversation going into the background, implementation, and vision for .tel


[^1]: https://domainnamewire.com/2016/10/21/remember-tel-might-change/
[^2]: The Offer information is also not present, but that is not part of the contact information and might just be added on the HTTP server. It is not clear to me where the image gallery is stored - possibly outside of the DNS as well.
[^3]: Do this at your own risk!
[^4]: As described in the [podcast interview](https://web.archive.org/web/20130729202449id_/http://itc.conversationsnetwork.org/shows/detail4424.html) there is (or at least was) a facility to encrypt contact data using a "friending" mechanism, but this requires additional setup and is not the default.
